---
layout: post
title: "Why Race 10th Scale Pan Cars?"
---

The most popular pan car classes (in the UK) are GT12 and LMP12, both 12th
scale. Yet, there are a number of stalwarts who keep running the bigger 10th
scale pan cars, be it in GT10/WGT (World GT), WGT-R, or even Pro10 form, why is
that?


Ease of Setup
=============

A lot of the setup of an RC car is proportional to its size, and so, a bigger
car will have a bigger setup window than a smaller one. The 10th scale cars,
being 20% bigger than the 12th scale ones, can thus tolerate a lot more
variance in their setup: a spring that's slightly collapsed, a little bit of
tweak...

Sure, they will work better if they are set up as well as possible, but a
problem that would completely upset the handling of a 12th scale car and make
it nearly undrivable, can often just be a bit of pulling to one side on the
bigger car, which might not be acceptable for a national race, but makes club
racing a lot less frustrating!

On top of that, most of the 10th scale classes tend to use control tyres of
some sort, either the lilac striped "World GT" foam tyres, or the rubber tyres
of WGT-R. This removes one variable, and simplifies set up by that much. A
bigger foam tyre can also tolerate more chunking until it is no longer usable,
and the cars weighting about the same means that the tyre loading is lower,
causing the tyres to wear more slowly, meaning less work to maintain the setup,
and lower running costs. The rubber tyres used in WGT-R make things even
simpler!

Speed and Ease of Driving
=========================

The bigger cars are a little bit lazier and less nimble, than their 12th scale
counterparts. This might seem like bad things, but it also means they are more
stable, and easier to drive quickly.

Pro10 and the older boosted GT10 classes are packing about as much power as the
LMP12 modified class cars, but while the 12th scale modified cars are renowed
to be very difficult to drive, the more run-of-the-mill drivers in GT10 and
Pro10 didn't have any more difficulty than they did driving the LMP12 stock
class or GT12, with lap times being faster.

If you want to keep things more gentle, WGT-R runs with the same power and
weight as GT12 cars do, and blinky GT10 only have a bit more power (while being
less "pointy" to drive), so there's a wide range of speeds possible with
essentially the same cars.

The downside is that the bigger cars might have trouble with some tighter track
layouts which might be popular at clubs usually running 12th scale cars
(whether GT12 or LMP12), but anywhere that touring cars are also run
successfully, the 10th scale pan cars can very well! It's not a question of
size, my local club is only 16x10m, but being orientated towards touring cars,
the layouts are quite friendly to the bigger pan cars (having even run 235mm
wide ones!).

Both Indoors or Outdoors
========================

While some folks do run 12th scale cars outdoors, they are not nearly as
well-suited, and require very smooth tracks. Meanwhile, 10th scale pan cars are
very commonly run outdoors. WLRC used to run GT10, Bedworth has a few people
running Pro10 (also popular in continental Europe), and Formula 1 cars are run
at most outdoor track in the UK.

So, much like touring cars, 10th scale pan cars only need a few adjustments to
be used year round!

Ease of Build and Maintenance
=============================

They are also a bit easier to work on, thanks to their larger size. A bit more
space around the servo to make adjustments, easier to do a nice job of
installing electrics in them, easier to fit the body shells... This isn't a
huge difference, people are able to build their 12th scale cars just fine, but
it's a nice bonus!


